INNOVATIONS IN SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY
Deep Neural Networks Are More Accurate Than Humans at Detecting
Sexual Orientation From Facial Images
Yilun Wang and Michal Kosinski
Stanford University
We show that faces contain much more information about sexual orientation than can be perceived or
interpreted by the human brain. We used deep neural networks to extract features from 35,326 facial
images. These features were entered into a logistic regression aimed at classifying sexual orientation.
Given a single facial image, a classifier could correctly distinguish between gay and heterosexual men
in 81% of cases, and in 71% of cases for women. Human judges achieved much lower accuracy: 61%
for men and 54% for women. The accuracy of the algorithm increased to 91% and 83%, respectively,
given five facial images per person. Facial features employed by the classifier included both fixed (e.g.,
nose shape) and transient facial features (e.g., grooming style). Consistent with the prenatal hormone
theory of sexual orientation, gay men and women tended to have gender-atypical facial morphology,
expression, and grooming styles. Prediction models aimed at gender alone allowed for detecting gay
males with 57% accuracy and gay females with 58% accuracy. Those findings advance our understanding
of the origins of sexual orientation and the limits of human perception. Additionally, given that
companies and governments are increasingly using computer vision algorithms to detect people’s
intimate traits, our findings expose a threat to the privacy and safety of gay men and women.
Keywords: sexual orientation, facial morphology, prenatal hormone theory, computational social science,
privacy
Supplemental materials: http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/pspa0000098.supp
The science of judging one’s character from their facial char-
acteristics, or physiognomy, dates back to ancient China and
Greece (Jenkinson, 1997). Aristotle and Pythagoras were among
its disciples, and the latter is said to have selected his students
based on their facial features (Riedweg, 2005). Such beliefs have
persisted and grown in popularity over the centuries. Robert Fitz-
Roy, the captain of the Beagle, believed that Darwin’s nose re-
vealed a lack of energy and determination, and was close to barring
him from the historic voyage (Glaser, 2002). Cesare Lombroso, the
founder of criminal anthropology, believed that criminals could be
identified by their facial features. He claimed, for example, that
arsonists have a “softness of skin, an almost childlike appearance,
and an abundance of thick straight hair that is almost feminine”
(Lombroso, 1911, p. 51). By the 18th century, physiognomy “was
not merely a popular fad but also the subject of intense academic
debate about the promises it held for future progress” (Porter,
2003, p. 497).
Physiognomy is now universally, and rightly, rejected as a mix
of superstition and racism disguised as science (Jenkinson, 1997).
Due to its legacy, studying or even discussing the links between
facial features and character became taboo, leading to a wide-
spread presumption that no such links exist. However, there are
many demonstrated mechanisms that imply the opposite. Such
mechanisms can be arranged into three groups. First, there is much
evidence that character can influence one’s facial appearance (e.g.,
Lõhmus, Sundström, & Björklund, 2009; Zebrowitz & Collins,
1997). For example, women that scored high on extroversion early
in life tend to become more attractive with age (Zebrowitz, Col-
lins, & Dutta, 1998). Second, facial appearance can alter one’s
character. Facial appearance drives first impressions of others,
influencing our expectations and behavior toward them, which, in
turn, shapes their character (Berry, 1991; Berry & Brownlow,
1989; Penton-Voak, Pound, Little, & Perrett, 2006; Todorov, Said,
Engell, & Oosterhof, 2008; Zebrowitz & Collins, 1997; Zebrowitz
Yilun Wang and Michal Kosinski, Graduate School of Business, Stan-
ford University.
Author notes are available at https://goo.gl/9b2aR2. Yilun Wang and
Michal Kosinski contributed equally to this work. Yilun Wang and Michal
Kosinski collected the data and conducted the analysis; Michal Kosinski
wrote the article.
The study has been approved by Stanford University’s IRB.
We thank Samuel Gosling, Robert Sternberg, Raphael Silberzahn, Mar-
tie Haselton, Amir Goldberg, Poruz Khambatta, Anonymous Gabriella,
Jason Rentfrow, Kai Ruggeri, Pierre Dechant, Brent Roberts, David Mack,
and Nicole Paulk for their critical reading of the earlier version of this
article. Also, we thank Isabelle Abraham for proofreading and Mariia
Vorobiova for graphical design. Finally, we would like to thank the
creators of Face for allowing us to use their software free of charge.
Correspondence concerning this article should be addressed to Michal
Kosinski, Graduate School of Business, Stanford University, 655 Knight
Way, Stanford, CA 94305. E-mail: michalk@stanford.edu
This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology
© 2018 American Psychological Association
2018, Vol. 114, No. 2, 246–257
0022-3514/18/$12.00
http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/pspa0000098
246
All rights, including for text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies, are reserved.


et al., 1998). Good-looking people, for example, receive more
positive social feedback, and thus tend to become even more
extroverted (Lukaszewski & Roney, 2011). Finally, there is a
broad range of factors affecting both facial appearance and one’s
traits. Those include prenatal and postnatal hormonal levels (Jones
et al., 2015; Lefevre, Lewis, Perrett, & Penke, 2013; Whitehouse
et al., 2015), developmental history (Astley, Stachowiak, Clarren,
& Clausen, 2002), environmental factors, and gene expression
(Ferry et al., 2014). Testosterone levels, for instance, significantly
affect both: behavior (e.g., dominance) and facial appearance (e.g.,
facial-width-to-height-ratio; Lefevre et al., 2014).
The existence of such links between facial appearance and
character is supported by the fact that people can accurately judge
others’ character, psychological states, and demographic traits
from their faces (Zebrowitz, 1997). For example, we can easily and
accurately identify others’ gender, age, race, or emotional state—
even from a glimpse of their faces (Brown & Perrett, 1993; Macrae
& Bodenhausen, 2000; Roberts & Bruce, 1988). People also judge,
with some minimal accuracy, others’ political views (e.g., Rule &
Ambady, 2010; Samochowiec, Wänke, & Fiedler, 2010), honesty
(e.g., Bond, Berry, & Omar, 1994), personality (e.g., Borkenau,
Brecke, Möttig, & Paelecke, 2009), sexual orientation (e.g., Rule
& Ambady, 2008), or even the likelihood of winning an election
(e.g., Ballew & Todorov, 2007; Little, Burriss, Jones, & Roberts,
2007; Todorov, Mandisodza, Goren, & Hall, 2005). Such judg-
ments are not very accurate, but are common and spontaneous.
Importantly, the low accuracy of humans when judging character
from others’ faces does not necessarily mean that relevant cues are
not prominently displayed. Instead, people may lack the ability to
detect or interpret them. It is possible that some of our intimate
traits are prominently displayed on the face, even if others cannot
perceive them. Here, we test this hypothesis using modern com-
puter vision algorithms.
Recent progress in artificial intelligence (AI) and computer
vision has been largely driven by the widespread adoption of deep
neural networks (DNN), or neural networks composed of a large
number of hidden layers (LeCun, Bengio, & Hinton, 2015). DNNs
mimic the neocortex by simulating large, multilevel networks of
interconnected neurons. DNNs excel at recognizing patterns in
large, unstructured data such as digital images, sound, or text, and
analyzing such patterns to make predictions. DNNs are increas-
ingly outperforming humans in visual tasks such as image classi-
fication, facial recognition, or diagnosing skin cancer (Esteva et
al., 2017; LeCun et al., 2015; Lu & Tang, 2014). The superior
performance of DNNs offers an opportunity to identify links
between characteristics and facial features that might be missed or
misinterpreted by the human brain.
We tested our hypothesis on a specific intimate trait: sexual
orientation. We chose this trait for three main reasons. First, it is
an intimate psycho-demographic trait that cannot be easily de-
tected by others. While people can detect others’ sexual orientation
from both neutral and expressive faces (Rule & Ambady, 2008;
Tskhay & Rule, 2015), or even from a single facial feature such as
the mouth, eyes, or hair (Lyons, Lynch, Brewer, & Bruno, 2014;
Rule, MacRae, & Ambady, 2009), the accuracy of such judgments
is very limited, ranging from 55% to 65% (where a random choice
offers an accuracy of 50%; Ambady, Hallahan, & Conner, 1999;
Lyons et al., 2014; Rule et al., 2009). The links between facial
features and sexual orientation, however, may be stronger than
what meets the human eye. Recent evidence shows that gay men
and lesbians,1 who arguably have more experience and motivation
to detect the sexual orientation of others, are marginally more
accurate than heterosexuals (Brambilla, Riva, & Rule, 2013).
Second, the widely accepted prenatal hormone theory (PHT) of
sexual orientation predicts the existence of links between facial
appearance and sexual orientation. According to the PHT, same-
gender sexual orientation stems from the underexposure of male
fetuses or overexposure of female fetuses to androgens that are
responsible for sexual differentiation (Allen & Gorski, 1992; Jan-
nini, Blanchard, Camperio-Ciani, & Bancroft, 2010; Udry &
Chantala, 2006). As the same androgens are responsible for the
sexual dimorphism of the face, the PHT predicts that gay people
will tend to have gender-atypical facial morphology (Bulygina,
Mitteroecker, & Aiello, 2006; Rhodes, 2006; Whitehouse et al.,
2015). According to the PHT, gay men should tend to have more
feminine facial features than heterosexual men, while lesbians
should tend to have more masculine features than heterosexual
women. Thus, gay men are predicted to have smaller jaws and
chins, slimmer eyebrows, longer noses, and larger foreheads; the
opposite should be true for lesbians. Furthermore, as prenatal
androgen levels also drive the sexual differentiation of behaviors
and preferences during adulthood (Meyer-Bahlburg, 1984; Udry,
2000), the PHT predicts that gay people may tend to adopt gender-
atypical facial adornments, expressions, and grooming styles. Such
gender-atypical behaviors and preferences might also be encoded
in gay culture, further amplifying the effect of the prenatal andro-
gen levels.
Previous empirical evidence provides mixed support for the
gender typicality of facial features of gay men and women. Hughes
and Bremme (2011) studied a sample of 60 images of gay men and
concluded that gay men had, on average, more feminine facial
features. Lyons, Lynch, Brewer, and Bruno (2014) asked 120
human judges to rate the masculinity and femininity of 80 faces of
men and women. They found that on average, heterosexual women
and gay men were rated as more feminine and less masculine than
lesbians and heterosexual men. However, Skorska, Geniole, Vrysen,
McCormick, and Bogaert (2015) used a sample of 390 photographs of
men and women, and found that both lesbians and gay men had more
masculine faces than heterosexual women and men, respectively.
Valentova, Kleisner, Havlícˇek, and Neustupa (2014, p. 353) used a
sample of facial images of 40 gay and 40 heterosexual men, and found
that on average, gay men had relatively wider and shorter faces,
smaller and shorter noses, and larger and more rounded jaws, or “a
mosaic of both feminine and masculine features.” Such mixed find-
ings might be attributed to the difficulty of precisely defining and
measuring facial femininity. They might also be attributed to the fact
that the difference between gay and heterosexual faces may be too
subtle to be reliably detected in the small samples employed in these
studies. This study aims to address those limitations by using a much
larger sample size and data-driven methods, including an algorithm-
based measure of facial femininity.
Finally, and perhaps most importantly, the predictability of
sexual orientation could have serious and even life-threatening
implications to gay men and women and the society as a whole. In
1 Following the APA’s recommendation, the term gay is used to refer to
same-gender sexual orientation.
This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.
247
ALGORITHM CAN DETECT SEXUAL ORIENTATION FROM FACES
All rights, including for text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies, are reserved.


some cultures, gay men and women still suffer physical and
psychological abuse at the hands of governments, neighbors, and
even their own families. Perhaps due to discrimination and stig-
matization, gay people are also at a higher risk of depression,
suicide, self-harm, and substance abuse (King et al., 2008). Con-
sequently, their well-being and safety may depend on their ability
to control when and to whom to reveal their sexual orientation.
Press reports suggest that governments and corporations are de-
veloping and deploying face-based prediction tools aimed at inti-
mate psycho–demographic traits, such as the likelihood of com-
mitting a crime, or being a terrorist or pedophile (Chin & Lin,
2017; Lubin, 2016). The laws in many countries criminalize same-
gender sexual behavior, and in eight countries—including Iran,
Mauritania, Saudi Arabia, and Yemen—it is punishable by death
(United Nations Human Rights Council, 2015). It is thus critical to
inform policymakers, technology companies and, most impor-
tantly, the gay community, of how accurate face-based predictions
might be.
This work examines whether an intimate psycho–demographic
trait, sexual orientation, is displayed on human faces beyond what
can be perceived by humans. We address this question using a
data-driven approach. A DNN was used to extract features from
the facial images of 35,326 gay and heterosexual men and women.
These features were entered (separately for each gender) as inde-
pendent variables into a cross-validated logistic regression model
aimed at predicting self-reported sexual orientation. The resulting
classification accuracy offers a proxy for the amount of informa-
tion relevant to the sexual orientation displayed on human faces.
We also explore the features employed by the classifier and
examine whether, as predicted by the PHT, the faces of gay men
and women tend to be gender atypical. Furthermore, we compare
the accuracy of the computer algorithm with that of human judges.
Human accuracy does not only provide a baseline for interpreting
the algorithm’s accuracy, but it also helps to examine whether the
nonstandardized facial images used here are not more revealing of
sexual orientation than standardized facial images taken in a con-
trolled environment. Finally, using an independent sample of gay
men’s facial images, we test the external predictive validity of the
classifier developed here.
Study 1a: Using Deep Neural Networks to Detect
Sexual Orientation
In Study 1a, we show that a DNN can be used to identify sexual
orientation from facial images. Previous studies linking facial
features with sexual orientation used either images of neutral2
faces taken in a laboratory (e.g., Skorska et al., 2015; Valentova et
al., 2014) or self-taken images obtained from online dating web-
sites (e.g., Hughes & Bremme, 2011; Lyons et al., 2014; Rule &
Ambady, 2008; Rule, Ambady, Adams, & Macrae, 2008). We
employed the latter approach, as such images can be collected in
large numbers, from more representative samples, and at a lower
cost (from the perspective of both the participants and researchers).
Larger and more representative samples, in turn, enable the dis-
covery of phenomena that might not have been apparent in the
smaller, lab-based samples. Additionally, using self-taken, easily
accessible digital facial images increases the ecological validity of
our results, which is particularly important given their critical
privacy implications.
Images taken and uploaded by the participants have a number of
potential drawbacks. They may vary in quality, facial expression,
head orientation, and background. Furthermore, given that they
were originally posted on a dating website, they might be espe-
cially revealing of sexual orientation. We take several steps to
mitigate the influence of such factors. First, the facial features are
extracted using a DNN that was specifically developed to focus on
nontransient facial features, disregarding the head’s orientation
and the background. Second, Study 1b investigates the areas of the
face employed by the classifier and shows that the classifier
focuses on the face and does not rely on the background. Third,
Studies 1c and 2 explore the facial features used by the classifier
and shows that they are consistent with PHT, a widely accepted
theory explaining the origins of sexual orientation. Fourth, Studies
3 and 4 show that the images used here were not substantially more
revealing of sexual orientation than images of neutral faces taken
in a controlled setting or images obtained from Facebook.
Method
Facial images.
We obtained facial images from public pro-
files posted on a U.S. dating website. We recorded 130,741 images
of 36,630 men and 170,360 images of 38,593 women between the
ages of 18 and 40, who reported their location as the United States.
Gay and heterosexual people were represented in equal numbers.
Their sexual orientation was established based on the gender of the
partners that they were looking for (according to their profiles).
The location of the face in the image, outlines of its elements,
and the head’s orientation were extracted using a widely used
face-detection software: Face.3 Figure 1 shows the output of
Face in a graphical format. The colored dots (Panel A) indicate
the location of the facial landmarks outlining the contour and
elements of the face. Additionally, Face provided the estimates
of the head’s yaw, pitch, and roll (Panel B).
Based on the Face results, we removed images containing
multiple faces, partially hidden faces (i.e., with one or more
landmarks missing), and overly small faces (i.e., where the dis-
tance between the eyes was below 40 pixels). We also removed
faces that were not facing the camera directly (i.e., with a yaw
greater than 15 degrees and a pitch greater than 10 degrees).
Next, we employed Amazon Mechanical Turk (AMT) workers
to verify that the faces were adult, Caucasian, fully visible, and of
a gender that matched the one reported on the user’s profile. We
limited the task to the workers from the U.S., who had previously
completed at least 1,000 tasks and obtained an approval rate of at
least 98%. Only faces approved by four out of six workers were
retained (see Figure S1 in supplemental materials, for the instruc-
tions presented to the workers).
Finally, we randomly removed some users to balance the age
distribution of the sexual orientation subsamples and their size—
separately for each gender. The final sample contained 35,326
facial images of 14,776 gay and heterosexual (50/50%) men and
2 We believe that no face can be truly “neutral.” People may systemat-
ically differ in the expression that they adopt when instructed to “adopt a
neutral expression.” Furthermore, even an image of a perfectly neutral face
(e.g., taken under anesthesia) would still contain traces of typically adopted
expressions (e.g., laugh lines), grooming style (e.g., skin health), and one’s
environment (e.g., tan).
3 Face can be accessed at http://www.faceplusplus.com.
This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.
248
WANG AND KOSINSKI
All rights, including for text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies, are reserved.


women (53/47%; see Table 1 for details). Facial images were
cropped using the facial frame provided by Face (the blue box
in Figure 1), and resized to 224  224 pixels.
Extracting facial features using a deep neural network.
Facial features were extracted from the images using a widely
employed DNN called VGG-Face (Parkhi, Vedaldi, & Zisserman,
2015). VGG-Face was originally developed (or trained) using a
sample of 2.6 million images for the purpose of facial recognition
(i.e., recognizing a given person across different images). VGG-
Face is similar to traditional scoring keys accompanying psychomet-
ric tests. A traditional scoring key can be used to convert responses to
test questions into one or more psychometric scores, such as a single
IQ score, or a set of five Big Five personality scores. VGG-Face
translates a facial image into 4,096 scores subsuming its core features.
Unfortunately, unlike psychometric scores, VGG-Face scores are not
easily interpretable. A single score might subsume differences in
multiple facial features typically considered to be distinct by humans
(e.g., nose shape, skin tone, or eye color).
VGG-Face offers two main advantages in the context of this study.
First, successful facial recognition depends on the DNN’s ability to
detect facial features that are unlikely to vary across images. Thus,
VGG-Face aims at representing a given face as a vector of scores that
are as unaffected as possible by facial expression, background, light-
ing, head orientation, image properties such as brightness or contrast,
and other factors that can vary across different images of the same
person. Consequently, employing VGG-Face scores enabled us to
minimize the role of such transient features when distinguishing
between gay and heterosexual faces. Second, employing a DNN
trained on a different sample and for a different purpose reduces the
risk of overfitting (i.e., discovering differences between gay and
heterosexual faces that are specific to our sample rather than univer-
sal). We also tried training a custom DNN directly on the images in
our sample; its accuracy was somewhat higher, but it exposed us to
the risk of overfitting.
Training classifiers.
We used a simple prediction model,
logistic regression, combined with a standard dimensionality-
reduction approach: singular value decomposition (SVD). SVD is
similar to principal component analysis (PCA), a dimensionality-
reduction approach widely used by social scientists. The models
were trained separately for each gender.
Self-reported sexual orientation (gay/heterosexual) was used as
a dependent variable; 4,096 scores, extracted using VGG-Face,
were used as independent variables. To prevent overfitting, we
used a 20-fold cross-validation when estimating the predictions.
The users were split into 20 subsamples; one of the subsamples
(test set) was put aside, while the remaining 19 subsamples (train-
ing sets) were used to train the prediction model. As the number of
independent variables was relatively large (4,096) when compared
with the number of cases (7,083 in the smallest training set), we
used SVD to extract n  500 dimensions4 from the independent
variables. This helped to reduce the number of independent vari-
ables and eliminate redundant information.
A logistic regression model was trained to classify sexual ori-
entation (a dependent variable) using 500 singular values extracted
from VGG-Face scores (independent variables). Least absolute
shrinkage and selection operator (LASSO; Hastie, Tibshirani, &
Friedman, 2009) was used for variable selection and regularization
when training the regression model. The LASSO penalty param-
eter  was set to 1; the regularization parameter  was automati-
cally estimated using 10-fold cross-validation.
Finally, the model built on the training set, combining the SVD
dimensionality reduction and logistic regression, was used to pre-
dict the sexual orientation of the participants in the test set. This
procedure was repeated 20 times to assign a probability (ranging
from 0 to 1) of being gay to all images in the sample.
For many users, more than one facial image was available. This
enabled us to examine how the accuracy changes with the number
of facial images available. To produce an aggregate probability of
being gay based on n images, the probabilities associated with a
randomly selected set of n images (ranging from 1 to 5) of a given
participant were averaged.5 Thus, a participant with three facial
images was described by three probabilities of being gay: one
based on a single randomly selected image, one based on two
randomly selected images, and one based on all three images.
Results
The accuracy of predicting sexual orientation from facial images
is presented in Figure 2. Across this article, the accuracy is
expressed using the area under receiver operating characteristic
curve (AUC) coefficient. AUC represents the likelihood of a
classifier being correct when presented with the faces of two
randomly selected participants—one gay and one heterosexual.
The AUC  .50 (or 50%) indicates that the classifier is correct
only half of the time, which is no better than a random draw. The
AUC  1.00 (or 100%) indicates that the classifier is always
correct. AUC is an equivalent of the Wilcoxon signed-ranks test
coefficient, used more widely in social sciences.
4 Dimensions extracted by SVD are referred to as singular values; they
are an equivalent of principal components in the context of PCA.
5 Logit transformation is used whenever the probabilities are averaged in
this work. This means that the probabilities are logit transformed and
averaged, and the resulting values are converted back into probabilities
using an inverse-logit transformation.
Figure 1.
Graphical illustration of the outcome produced by Face.
Panel A illustrates facial landmarks (colored dots, n  83) and facial frame
(blue box). Panel B illustrates pitch, roll, and yaw parameters that describe
the head’s orientation in space.
This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.
249
ALGORITHM CAN DETECT SEXUAL ORIENTATION FROM FACES
All rights, including for text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies, are reserved.


Among men, the classification accuracy equaled AUC  .81
when provided with one image per person. This means that in 81%
of randomly selected pairs—composed of one gay and one het-
erosexual man—gay men were correctly ranked as more likely to
be gay. The accuracy grew significantly with the number of images
available per person, reaching 91% for five images. The accuracy
was somewhat lower for women, ranging from 71% (one image) to
83% (five images per person).
Study 1b: Elements of the Facial Image Employed by
the Classifier
The high accuracy of the classifier developed in Study 1a
indicates that facial images contained much information related to
sexual orientation, and that much of this was captured by the facial
features extracted using VGG-Face. This section examines which
parts of the facial image enabled the classification. We address this
question by masking parts of a facial image and measuring the
degree to which the prediction has changed. If a given area of the
image is important to the classifier, masking it is likely to signif-
icantly alter the prediction (and vice versa).
Method
Facial images.
The results were produced separately for each
gender. Facial images of 100 male and 100 female users were
randomly drawn from the sample used in Study 1a. The faces were
adjusted to ascertain that a given facial feature (e.g., the mouth)
was in exactly the same place in all of the images. This was
achieved by warping images (using piecewise linear two-
dimensional [2D] transformation) to align them along nine land-
marks (the left and right eye corners, left and right mouth corners,
nose tip, and left and right nose corners).
Sexual orientation classifier.
We used the remaining images
from Study 1a to train the sexual orientation classifiers (separately for
men and women) following the procedure described in Study 1a.
Analysis.
We used the sexual orientation classifiers to esti-
mate the probability of being gay for the faces in the samples used
here. Next, an area of 7  7 pixels in the top-left corner was
masked in all 100 images and the probability of being gay was
estimated again. The procedure was repeated 1,024 times while
sliding the mask across the grid covering the entire image, com-
posed of 32  32 squares (each sized at 7  7 pixels). The average
absolute change in the probability of being gay, resulting from
masking a given area of the image, was used as a proxy for the
importance of a given area to the prediction of sexual orientation.
Results
The results are presented in Figure 3 as heat maps showing the
degree to which masking a given part of an image changes the
classification outcome. The color scale ranges from blue (no
change) to red (substantial change). Heat maps reveal that, for both
genders, classification mainly relied on the facial area and ignored
the background. The most informative facial areas among men
included the nose, eyes, eyebrows, cheeks, hairline, and chin;
Table 1
Frequencies of Users and Facial Images, and the Age
Distribution in the Final Sample Used in Study 1
Variable
Men
Women
Gay
Heterosexual
Lesbian
Heterosexual
Unique users
3,947
3,947
3,441
3,441
Median age (IQR)
33 (30–36)
33 (30–36)
29 (25–34)
29 (25–34)
Total images
8,996
8,645
7,457
10,228
Users with at least:
1 image
3,947
3,947
3,441
3,441
2 images
2,438
2,439
2,037
2,878
3 images
1,363
1,367
1,058
1,951
4 images
562
731
494
1,114
5 images
219
327
223
491
Note.
IQR stands for interquartile range.
Figure 2.
The accuracy of the DNN-based sexual orientation classifier
against the number of images used in the classification.
Figure 3.
Heat maps showing the degree to which masking a given part
of an image changes the (absolute) classification outcome, which is a proxy
for the importance of that region in classification. The color scale ranges
from blue (no change) to red (substantial change). The color-coded squares
were smoothed using 2D Gaussian filtering.
This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.
250
WANG AND KOSINSKI
All rights, including for text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies, are reserved.


informative areas among women included the nose, mouth corners,
hair, and neckline. The heat maps are not symmetrical because
duplicated facial features, such as eyes, may prompt the classifier
to focus on only one of them and ignore the other as redundant.
The results presented here confirm that the VGG-Face scores
extracted here focus on the facial features rather than on other parts
of the image.
Study 1c: Facial Features Predictive of Sexual
Orientation
Having established that the classification is based on facial
features (as opposed to other elements of the image), we turn our
attention to the differences between gay and heterosexual faces
that enabled the classification. We examine this question by ag-
gregating images classified as most and least likely to be gay in
Study 1a.
Method
Facial images.
The results were produced separately for each
gender. We used facial images and accompanying probabilities of
being gay from Study 1a and retained those containing faces facing
the camera directly (the head’s pitch and yaw, as estimated by
Face, was lower than two degrees). Next, we selected a
subset of images classified as most likely to be gay and a subset
of images classified as least likely to be gay. We used subsets
of 500 images per set to generate average landmarks’ locations
and 100 images per set to generate composite faces.
Average landmarks’ location.
The distances between facial
landmarks, extracted using Face (see Figure 1), were normal-
ized by setting the distance between the pupils to 1. The faces were
centered and rotated to align the eyes horizontally, and the land-
mark coordinates were averaged.
Composite face.
To obtain clearer composite faces, the im-
ages were warped using a piecewise linear 2D transformation
along the average location of Face landmarks (the pixels of
each image were transformed using bicubic interpolation). The
values of corresponding pixels were averaged across images to
produce composite faces.
Results
Figure 4 shows the average landmark locations and aggregate
appearance of the faces classified as most and least likely to be
gay. Consistent with the PHT, gay faces tended to be gender
atypical. Average landmark locations revealed that gay men had
narrower jaws and longer noses, while lesbians had larger jaws.
Composite faces suggest that gay men had larger foreheads than
heterosexual men, while lesbians had smaller foreheads than het-
erosexual women. The differences between the outlines of faces
and facial features of gay and heterosexual individuals are further
explored in Study 3.
The gender atypicality of gay faces extended beyond morphol-
ogy. Gay men had less facial hair, suggesting differences in
androgenic hair growth, grooming style, or both. They also had
lighter skin, suggesting potential differences in grooming, sun
Figure 4.
Composite faces and the average facial landmarks built by averaging faces classified as most and
least likely to be gay.
This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.
251
ALGORITHM CAN DETECT SEXUAL ORIENTATION FROM FACES
All rights, including for text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies, are reserved.


exposure, and/or testosterone levels.6 Lesbians tended to use less
eye makeup, had darker hair, and wore less revealing clothes (note
the higher neckline), indicating less gender-typical grooming and
style. Furthermore, although women tend to smile more in general
(Halberstadt, Hayes, & Pike, 1988), lesbians smiled less than their
heterosexual counterparts. Additionally, consistent with the asso-
ciation between baseball caps and masculinity in American culture
(Skerski, 2011), heterosexual men and lesbians tended to wear
baseball caps (see the shadow on their foreheads; this was also
confirmed by a manual inspection of individual images). The
gender atypicality of the faces of gay men and lesbians is further
explored in Study 2.
Study 2: Gender Atypicality of Gay People’s Faces
The qualitative analysis of the composite faces and average
landmarks’ locations for gay and heterosexual faces presented in
Study 1c suggest that the faces of gay men and lesbians tend to be
gender atypical. We test this hypothesis by using a data-driven
measure of facial femininity: the DNN-based gender classifier.
Method
Facial images.
We used facial images and accompanying
probabilities of being gay estimated in Study 1a.
Facial femininity.
We measured facial femininity by using a
gender classifier that assigns a probability of being female to each
facial image. This gender classifier was developed on an indepen-
dent sample of 2,891,355 facial images of Facebook users obtained
from the myPersonality.org project (Kosinski, Matz, Gosling,
Popov, & Stillwell, 2015). We used the same approach to prepro-
cess facial images and train the classifier, as described in Study 1a.
This time, however, we used gender as the dependent variable.
This gender classifier was applied to all facial images in the
sample used in Study 1a. The accuracy of this classifier, when
predicting gender, equaled AUC  .98.
Results
The results show that the faces of gay men were more feminine
and the faces of lesbians were more masculine than those of their
respective heterosexual counterparts. Among men, the data-driven
measure of facial femininity positively correlated with the proba-
bility of being gay (r  .20; p  .001; 95% CI [0.19, 0.21]).7 The
opposite was true for women (r  0.21; p  .001; 95% CI
[0.21, 0.20]).
Facial femininity alone allowed for classifying gay and hetero-
sexual faces with some accuracy: AUC  .57 for men and AUC 
.58 for women (based on one facial image).
Study 3: Morphology-Based Classifier
Study 1c shows the differences between the outlines of faces
and facial features of gay and heterosexual individuals. The current
study shows that such basic nontransient morphological features,
such as the outline of the nose or facial contour, provide enough
information to accurately classify sexual orientation.
Method
Facial images.
We used the same sample as in Study 1a.
Extracting morphological features.
We extracted morpho-
logical features from the coordinates of the 83 landmarks outlining
important facial features provided by Face (see Figure 1). To
subsume the shape of a given facial feature, such as the nose, we
computed Euclidean distances between the landmarks belonging to
that feature. For example, as there are 10 landmarks outlining the
nose (see Figure 1), its morphology was subsumed by a vector of
10  9  90 Euclidean distances. To account for the differing
sizes of the faces in facial images, the distances were normalized
by dividing them by the distance between the pupils.
This approach was applied to the following facial elements:
nose, eyes, eyebrows, mouth, contour of the face, and entire face
(see Figure 1 for the mapping between landmarks and facial
elements).
Training classifiers.
The classifiers were trained, separately
for each facial element and for all facial landmarks combined,
following a procedure similar to the one used in Study 1a. Here,
however, we used Euclidean distances instead of the VGG-Face
scores as independent variables. If the number of distances de-
scribing a given facial element was higher than 500, we used SVD
to reduce their number to 500 (in the same way as SVD was used
to reduce the number of VGG-Face scores in Study 1a).
Results
The accuracies of the landmark-based classifiers based on five
images per person are presented in Figure 5. The results show that
the shape of individual facial elements enabled high classification
accuracy for both genders. A notably high accuracy was provided
by facial contour alone (red landmarks in Figure 1): 75% for men
and 63% for women. This provides additional support for the link
between jaw shape between gay and heterosexual faces observed
in Study 1c (see Figure 4). While the outline of the eyes, eyebrows,
and mouth is—to some extent—affected by facial expression and
grooming, facial contour is relatively inflexible, emphasizing the
predictive power of fixed morphological traits.
The high performance of the contour-based classifiers, and fair
performance of the nose-based ones, suggest that the shape of
these (relatively fixed) facial elements is sufficient to detect sexual
orientation. Overall, the performance of the landmark-based clas-
sifiers is remarkable given how little information from the original
image is retained in the landmarks’ locations.